All glass line of graphics handles is my work.
But that's enough to keep Audrey quite busy.
But that's what it's all about.
Okay.
Don't ask me.
The title comes from a song by The Beatles, if you don't know that.
We always get funny responses when we make phone orders to our wholesalers or whatever.
If somebody hasn't heard the name of the company, we always have to spell it out.
I chose the G.O. just because I like the way the letter forms go together.
So our logo is a G and an O that are intertwined.
What's on your ring?
Well this ring is my single, my signature.
It's almost a brand.
It's a combination of a W and an M put together.
Originally it was more calligraphic and feeling.
It was the flowing M and a W combined.
And as I got into doing more and more science fiction, the edges on my signature got harder
and harder.
Now it's more of a hard edge type of thing.
Who knows, maybe it'll change in the future.
I had someone tell me by the way that my paintings wouldn't be worth much because I didn't sign
them with my full name that I used this signature that was like a brand.
And for three paintings, four paintings, I signed my name full out.
I signed it Waylon.
And that was the White Dragon, the other two Dragon books I did for Amicafry and a book
by Paul Anderson.
But after doing those, it just didn't feel right to sign my name.
It just wasn't my signature to me.
So I went back to using this MW in a circle and that's the way it's going to stay no
matter what anybody says I guess.
Definitely your prior?
Yeah.
Yeah, well I found it has made a bit of difference really in terms of sales of my artwork.
So I shouldn't have listened to that person's advice.
Let's go ahead and move on down.
Okay.
Yeah, let's start with Arthur's work.
How did you get contacted to do this particular one?
They just called me up.
They wanted to do it.
I said, sure.
I'm a real fan of 2001.
That's probably my favorite movie of all time.
And so I really wanted to do the cover to that particular book.
But the problem is they weren't sure how they wanted to try to sort of present the book
to the public.
So I did probably 12 concepts for that cover.
And I was equally disposed to all the different ways of approaching it.
And they chose this one.
Originally I thought of composing it so that the spaceship looked like a baby's rattle
in the hands of the baby.
But they didn't go for that.
They wanted a more front and center.
So there it is.
But I probably would have chosen not to have the spaceship in the painting at all and
to amplify this concept more.
But it's the first painting I did that was almost entirely airbrushed.
This is a whole airbrush around here.
It's really just a spaceship that is put in by hand as it were.
Strangely enough, I didn't care a whole lot for the book or not as much as I had hoped
I would.
I felt that Arthur didn't answer many of the important questions raised in both the books.
The motivation of the aliens, what the ultimate destiny of Earth would be, et cetera, et cetera.
None of that was answered.
And that left me feeling a little bit upset.
But I enjoyed doing the painting.
Okay.
What about the gold and green?
You've been doing the Piper stuff ever since they came out.
The beginning, right, since they started reprinting.
The concept behind this is that the fuzzies are not indigenous to this planet.
They've crash-landed from their alien species even to this alien planet.
And they've lost the entire record of their previous world in the ship, which was buried
in a landslide.
And so a lot of what this book has to do about is the succeeding loss of knowledge from generation
to generation, each younger generation learns a little bit less than the previous one about
their previous lifestyle, their technology, and everything.
And that's what's symbolized by this bright red butterfly that's flying out of reach of
this younger fuzzie here.
The golden dream is, in fact, the hope that someday the fuzzies will have picked up the
distress call before it was cut off by the landslide.
And will one day come to rescue the ones that have been stranded on this planet.
And that's why this one is off looking towards the sky.
That's pretty much what's involved in this painting.
And I like exploring the environment, coming up with the different plants and all that kind of stuff.
That one won the Hugo, right?
Well, you win a Hugo for the work you've done over the period of a year or whatever.
You know, as a best artist or whatever.
So it's not for this particular piece.
This one best show at the World Science Fiction Convention.
That's where I saw this one at Denvention.
And this one was for Delaney's book.
Yeah, this is a curious story to it.
Byron Price, the publisher, called me up and told me he was doing a book of short stories
by Samuel R. Delaney.
He said, I could do anything I wanted for the cover.
So I said, great.
You know, I sat down and I came up with, oh, maybe eight really, what's the word?
I felt they were spectacular concepts for this cover, but they were rather semi-mystical
and feeling.
And they didn't go for any of them.
And so they sent me a sketch of what they wanted for the cover.
And it showed a man coming into a porthole on one side and a woman in a lacy nightgown
on the other, on the back cover, waiting for a man to come home.
It was terrible.
So this is what they got.
And I joked with them and said that, well, it will really be liberated when they put
the woman on the front for a change and the man on the back.
But they're both coming home from work.
In essence is what they're doing.
And then granted, you see raw space behind them.
But that's, you know, I say it's because there's a glass and clothes bubble on the outside.
But the other reason I have for doing this painting is I was driving down the highway
once and I went under a bridge on either side of the bridge.
I had these signs with these yellow and black marks on them, you know, on either side.
And I was struck just by the imagery of these symmetrical orange and black stripes on either
side of this bridge.
That's pretty much how the composition for the painting came about was just that mental
image and then constructing the lights to give the feeling that this painting has.
There's a little bit of very much work in this painting also, especially just the creative
glare effect around the lights and the background here.
Okay, this is one of my buddy's favorites over here.
Yeah, this was an illustration for a poem by Robert E. Howard that never got published.
And hence the name of the painting is the Mad Poet.
And what you have here is a man in a dark room being illuminated by Luna, the moon.
And the substance of his mad dreams is seen in the floating smoke.
And there's all those little demons and creatures in the smoke there coming out of the candle.
That's, the light has been extinguished also.
It's all symbolic, metaphorical stuff indicating a state of mind.
But these are all paintings.
By the way, I didn't use any models for anything.
Used a model for that one there.
But you know, you asked me about that, you know.
I just wanted to point that out.
Amazing dragon.
And this painting here was commissioned from me by TSR Hobbies who has bought out Amazing
Stories magazine.
And they wanted to kick off their new acquisition as it were with a cover that symbolized both
elements of fantasy and science fiction.
So I used the astronaut as a symbol of science fiction and dragon as a symbol of fantasy.
Just put them together in a visually interesting way.
Sounds easy, doesn't it?
It's really, yeah, it took a long time, definitely.
Also, I'd always wanted to develop a black dragon after doing the white dragon.
And this was the first opportunity I had to do that.
So that is another reason why I wanted to do the painting.
Equal opportunity for dragons.
Excuse me.
This fellow looks a little like you.
He doesn't really.
I mean, he doesn't have my profile.
Everyone says that.
Why I don't know.
He just came out of my head.
So it could be, there's some of me in there.
But it wasn't my intention to do so.
So if that's true, it's accidental.
You are in CJ Cherry's cover on it.
Yeah.
Out of around 200 paintings, I've put myself in three of them, I think.
Three or four.
That I know about.
I mean, maybe unintentionally, I put myself in there.
I was away in England for six weeks or so.
And I hadn't touched a pencil to a paper or brush to canvas or anything that whole time.
I didn't even think about painting.
Well, I mean, I did when I went to an art gallery or whatever.
But I didn't think about myself painting at all.
And when I came back quite frankly, I wasn't sure I still had it in me.
I felt very strange when I came back after all that time.
And I sat down, this pain just kind of came out of me without any effort at all.
And it really felt good.
It was just a reassurance I needed to get back into doing what I was doing.
So I had a really good feeling about it.
Well, after that long period, after a couple of months, who knows?
I don't know.
I don't take anything for granted.
But, right.
I feel like a lot of my work is just trial and error anyway.
I don't know.
I have bad memory about a lot of things.
Some things I've got a good photographic memory towards.
Visual information.
But it's about procedures and conceptual things.
Sometimes I'm pretty forgetful.
So I have to, you know, who knows?
That's why a lot of my artwork looks different from one piece to the other.
It's because I think it's more that I forget from one painting to another how to do a painting
than it is that I deliberately try to vary it.
There are artists like Norman Rockwell who developed a stylistic technique for doing a
painting back when they were 18 or something.
They never varied from that for the entire lifetime.
It was always, you did this, then you did this, then you did this, then you did this,
then you did this, then you did this, then you did this, then you did this, then you
did this and you had a painting.
And I never have a set standard.
I never have a set procedure.
The way I did this painting is totally different from the way I did this one from the way I
did that one from that from that from that.
I mean, I think I have it down to about eight different approaches now probably, but it
doesn't make it easier.
It definitely adds time to the time it takes to do a painting and the mental anguish also.
You said you used a model on this one.
No, not this one.
This one.
He's the same model for both figures because they are supposed to be twins, but she's a
girl named Carrie.
She posed for me for that particular painting.
And not for this one I did.
There's hardly a need to because she's all covered in armor.
This one here is Amazon.
And just for the benefit of anyone listening to this, we're talking about Amazons and Amazons
too.
These are both books about women warriors.
You can see quite a variation in color, can't you?
From this to this.
Look at the color of the moon here and the yellowish cast here.
It's been completely lost.
That's something that it's hard for an artist to deal with.
It's a loss of quality and reproduction on book covers.
Yeah, I've heard this one.
There's not much you can do about it.
I've heard that some of the publishers are going to try and switch over to a laser printing
method, which is much more accurate.
Maybe so.
And it's going to result from that.
Did you're doing this one?
Is that what brought you to the cycle?
Yes.
Sometimes I've found that I've become a bargaining chip for the publishers.
They'll tell an author, well, if you let us shave $1,000 off of the money, our royalties
that we're supposed to pay for a particular job will let you have a way on the cover.
So you sell more books anyway and get the money back.
So we'll take the money off your advance and just add percentage on your royalties.
And they'll agree to that in advance because the authors polish on the cover by me.
And I think that happened in this particular instance.
Well, actually, I shouldn't say that because I don't know for certain.
It's just been a rumor that I heard.
These are both books about women warriors.
And I use the moon as a symbol of femininity, both in this case and in this one here where
you have the moon beginning to eclipse the sun.
It's a symbol of femininity, over-masculinity here because they're attacking a ship.
There was indeed a Chinese, a female pirate in the China seas in the 1800s who did terrify
and plunder many ships with their crew.
And she in fact retired to live a long life in China.
But is that that vague concept that brought about this pain?
Yeah, I'm going to buy the upgrade of that one.
I was thinking that just to carry this idea on further, when I read about this particular Chinese,
female Chinese pirate and her crew of Amazons,
plundering Portuguese and Spanish ships in the China seas among Japanese ships or whatever,
I thought how interesting their armor must have looked because they would have acquired
different bits and pieces from all these different types of countries.
And so she's got a Portuguese dagger and a western style chainmail and yet this one has
a more Japanese type of covering over the upper part of her torso.
And this is more oriental in feeling this armor here and here also.
You do much study in ancient weaponry and stuff like that?
Not a whole lot.
When I go to another country or something, I'll go to a museum to try to pick up,
well not just another country.
When I go anywhere that has an armor museum, I'll try to go and see it and study it.
But it's almost always buying class cases so you can't get a good photograph of it and all that.
So I have to rely on my memory mostly.
I've got a few books on it that help bring back my recollection of what it looked like.
The best thing about going, I remember the first time I went to a museum that had armor in it,
just to look at the armor and what a revelation was to see how it's strapped up from behind.
I mean obviously you can't always show somebody from the front.
If you don't know how it ties together in the back, you really suck.
The way that it buckles up and everything behind the legs and all that.
That was really important to me to figure that out.
But once I saw how it goes, generally, that's pretty much the same for all armor.
You never want to fight somebody and have somebody come from behind you with you and have armor on.
It's only a tank from the front.
Generally, yeah, that's true.
Don't forget 12, 30 days.
Gee, 12, 30.
No, no, it's a long time.
Just don't forget.
I think we're about finished here.
Let me turn myself off.
Never again will that happen.
No way.
When you paint a cover like this, you retain all the ranks, right?
Absolutely.
All I sell is the first one-time non-exclusive North American English language
paperback cover art rights or hardcover art rights or whatever.
Everything else is mine.
I have an agent in Germany who sells European rights.
I sell rights to companies in Japan or whatever, and they'll be able to use the artwork.
Otherwise, it's not much of a living.
That is pretty much how you have to supplement it.
And then the final sell, the artwork.
We'll bring in added revenues, but...
I'm being told time and time again that I'm pretty much at the top of my profession.
If this is the top, it doesn't say much for it, you know,
because there isn't a tremendous amount of money to be made doing paperback covers or book covers.
Unless you're exceedingly fast and you can turn them out.
Now, the guy who did the cover for Shogun and a bunch of other books,
he does over 100 covers a year.
So if he makes 1,500 a cover,
he's making a pretty respectable living.
But I do 2 to 4 a month tops.
That's one quarter of his output.
Does your revenue come back from the publishers coming in the form of royalty or just a straight payment?
It's a straight payment.
There have been publishers that have tried to get not publishers.
There have been a couple of small publishers that talk to royalties.
And some artists, ridiculously enough, are fighting for that, for a royalty type of system.
But publishers are really never going to go for that because they don't want the added bookkeeping.
I mean, it's already a nightmare for the authors to try to collect from their royalties,
but the artists would be totally ridiculous.
I want my money now.
I'm not going to trust them to pay me because I've had too many times when I've had royalty arrangements,
either as an author or as an artist in a few other books,
that I've had the higher lawyers to go out to the publishers to collect and everything.
By the time I'd go through all this rigmarole,
I might as well have just thrown it away.
I've lost more than I've gained, so I definitely would not want to see a royalty system.
And I think that if a publisher wants to institute some way of paying an artist back for a book that sells really well,
they've got to just have a bonus type of thing.
If you do really good, you get paid a straight fee, but if it gets on the best or less, you get an added fee or whatever.
That'd be a good way to do it.
You've written some also?
Well, I have a book on my own artwork called Wonder Works,
and it's got a little bit of writing by me in there.
And we're starting to work on the second Wonder Works now.
In fact, I just picked up my quote for the opening page in my second book.
I feel like I'm really on my way to getting the book done now.
If words weren't going to go for the peer, would you pay?
Absolutely.
That's the limitation of doing book covers,
is that you do have graphic design considerations in terms of the type, the title, and all that kind of stuff.
I'm probably less constrained by that than other artists,
because they're willing to kind of work around how I do it.
But I'm always unconscious of it.
So things get bottom weighted so that there's room on top for type.
And I'm used to it.
It's a constant challenge.
When I'm doing a wrap-around cover, one that goes over the spine onto the back,
then I get a chance to do a horizontal format, and I get a lot of those jobs.
I make sure to take once or twice a year an assignment where I'm doing interior illustrations,
where I don't have to be worried about type at all.
And if I ever get a chance to do things for myself, of course, then I don't have to worry about type either.
But I don't.
I never give myself time to do something just for myself, unfortunately.
I mean, all my illustrations are for myself, because I consider myself an illustrator more than anything.
But I would like to do something where I don't have to worry about any consideration at all, type,
or design format, or public standards of taste, or decency, or anything.
I'm just completely paying exactly what comes into my mind, exactly the way I see it, without any considerations.
What's my...
Do you have to consider doing an art book along those lines?
No.
Not really.
It's out of my...
I wouldn't consider it simply because I wouldn't give myself the time to.
There's too many good books I want to illustrate that I wouldn't want to take the amount of time it would take to do a whole art book
of just pieces I've done entirely for myself.
It would be a 25-year process, probably, to do something like that.
And...
That's a right time to...
I don't know. I don't think I'd want to be involved in something that long-term.
I don't think I'll even be... I'm not even sure I'll be painting, you know, that long for now.
I may develop another interest between now and then.
So who knows?
Can you show me how to write a picture?
A pair of hot scenes?
One hopes you won't give it up entirely.
I doubt it. I don't think I'll ever give up illustrating.
I certainly won't give up painting, and...
One thing I know I'll always be doing is rendering a human figure.
That's probably the core of my interest in art.
So I'll be kicking around for a few years to come anyway.
Thank you.